docs/COMPETENCY_QUESTIONS.md, before:

# DFO Salmon Ontology: Competency Questions

## Scope

This ontology models **operational processes and data structures** for Pacific salmon management at DFO, including:

- **Stock Assessment**: Escapement surveys, measurement protocols, estimate types
- **Genetics/GSI**: Genetic sample analysis, reporting units, composition measurements  
- **Management & Policy**: Conservation status, management units, regulatory compliance
- **Data Stewardship**: Quality control, validation rules, automated classification

**This is NOT a biological domain ontology** about salmon ecology or behavior, but rather an **operational ontology** for data management and integration.

# Competency Questions — DFO Salmon Ontology MVP (v0.1)

**Scope:** Questions the MVP must answer across SPSR (hero), GRD, and SILS→Narratives, plus near‑term (v0.3) questions. Each item lists required fields/terms and whether it’s answerable **Now** (v0.1) or **Next** (v0.3).

---

## A) Terminology, Validation, and Provenance
- Where are **spawner_origin** values used inconsistently (e.g., *wild* vs *unmarked*)?  
  *Needs:* `spawner_origin` (SKOS), template validation (SHACL). **Now**
- Which records use a **proxy** (e.g., mainstem index, GSI) **without** a `proxy_justification`?  
  *Needs:* `data_source_type`, `proxy_justification`. **Now**
- For each record derived from **GSI**, is an **uncertainty metric** present (e.g., `gsi_sample_size`, `gsi_confidence_interval`)?  
  *Needs:* `data_source_type=genetic_proxy`, `gsi_sample_size`, `gsi_confidence_interval`. **Now**
- Which assessments/narratives lack **minimum provenance** (data sources, method, code version, reviewer, date)?  
  *Needs:* provenance profile (PROV/DQV), `method`, `code_version`, `reviewer`. **Now**
- Which SPSR submissions fail **required‑field validation** and what are the **fix hints**?  
  *Needs:* SHACL shapes + validator outputs. **Now**

## B) CU↔SMU Crosswalk and Governance
- For a given **SMU**, which **CUs** participate and with what **rationale/version**?  
  *Needs:* CU↔SMU crosswalk (SKOS + CSV), `rationale`, `version_date`. **Now**
- Where does a **CU** appear in **multiple SMUs**, and what governance note explains it?  
  *Needs:* crosswalk notes, ambiguity flags. **Now**
- Show **status disagreements** or **data‑deficient** flags across CUs within an SMU.  
  *Needs:* CU status, DD flags, mapping to SMU. **Next**

## C) Reference Points / Benchmarks
- For each CU/SMU, which **reference_point_type** and **benchmark_method** were used?  
  *Needs:* `reference_point_type` (Sgen, Sref, FRP‑L, USR, LRP…), `benchmark_method` (SR, percentile, expert). **Now**
- Where is **benchmark_sensitivity** flagged (e.g., dependence on priors/assumptions)?  
  *Needs:* `benchmark_sensitivity` boolean/enum + note. **Now**
- Given an SMU, list component CU **LBMs** used to derive the **LRP**, with links to methods.  
  *Needs:* CU LBM values + SMU LRP derivation provenance. **Next**

## D) GRD ↔ SPSR Interoperability (GSI)
- For a given **Run_ID**/**Sample_ID**, what **assay/panel** produced the result and where is it applied in SPSR?  
  *Needs:* GRD keys (`Run_ID`, `Sample_ID`, `Assay_ID`), join table or mapping. **Now** (structure), **Next** (full linkage)
- List SPSR estimates that **consume GSI composition** without propagating **uncertainty**.  
  *Needs:* link from SPSR record → GRD result (or proxy flag) + uncertainty fields. **Next**

## E) SILS → Narrative Reproducibility
- Which **stream inspections** (SILS) were combined to form a **narrative**, and what rules were applied?  
  *Needs:* narrative bundle metadata (`inputs`, `ruleset_id`, `method`), provenance. **Next**
- Are **sample sizes** and **variation estimates** recorded for narratives?  
  *Needs:* `sample_size`, `variance/CI`, calculation method. **Next**

## F) Decision‑Context Readiness (Management & Advice)
- For a selected **decision context** (e.g., TAC/HCR), are all **required indicators** and **reference points** present and current for the target SMU(s)?  
  *Needs:* decision→indicator mapping, ref point registry. **Next**
- Where are **gaps** (missing data/uncertainty) that would block advice generation?  
  *Needs:* completeness checks over required sets. **Next**

---

## Minimal SPARQL Sketches (for inclusion in the repo)
> Keep these as templates; wire to your triplestore built from vocab + metadata extracts.

- **Proxy w/out justification**  
  ```sparql
  SELECT ?record WHERE {
    ?record :data_source_type :genetic_proxy .
    FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?record :proxy_justification ?j . FILTER(STRLEN(STR(?j)) > 0) }
  }
  ```

- **Benchmark method by unit**  
  ```sparql
  SELECT ?unit ?refPoint ?method WHERE {
    ?unit :hasReferencePoint ?refPoint .
    ?refPoint :benchmark_method ?method .
  }
  ```

- **Missing provenance minimum**  
  ```sparql
  SELECT ?artifact WHERE {
    ?artifact a :AssessmentOrNarrative .
    FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?artifact :data_source ?s }
    UNION FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?artifact :method ?m }
    UNION FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?artifact :code_version ?v }
    UNION FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?artifact :reviewer ?r }
  }
  ```

---

## Field/Term Checklist for v0.1 (must exist in templates & SHACL)
- `spawner_origin` (SKOS) — values + definitions + examples
- `data_source_type` (direct_observation | model_estimate | genetic_proxy)
- `proxy_justification` (string)
- `reference_point_type` (SKOS) + `benchmark_method` + `benchmark_sensitivity`
- `gsi_sample_size`, `gsi_confidence_interval`, `gsi_data_source`
- CU↔SMU crosswalk table with `rationale`, `version_date`
- Provenance minimum: `data_source`, `method`, `code_version`, `reviewer`, `date`

---

## Prioritization Notes
- **Now (v0.1)** answers: terminology consistency, proxy justification, GSI uncertainty presence/absence, benchmark/method registry, CU↔SMU mapping with rationale, provenance minimum, validator pass/fail.
- **Next (v0.3)** adds: narrative bundles, LRP derivation trace, decision‑context completeness checks, uncertainty propagation from GRD.

Commit message:

Add ontology requirements and critical path documentation; update competency questions
- Introduced a new document outlining the ontology product plan and critical path for the DFO Salmon Ontology, detailing core project streams and their tangible outputs.
- Removed the outdated product requirements document to streamline documentation and improve accessibility for contributors.

docs/COMPETENCY_QUESTIONS.md, after:

# DFO Salmon Ontology: Competency Questions

## Scope

This ontology models **operational processes and data structures** for Pacific salmon management at DFO, including:

- **Stock Assessment**: Escapement surveys, measurement protocols, estimate types
- **Genetics/GSI**: Genetic sample analysis, reporting units, composition measurements  
- **Management & Policy**: Conservation status, management units, regulatory compliance
- **Data Stewardship**: Quality control, validation rules, automated classification

**This is NOT a biological domain ontology** about salmon ecology or behavior, but rather an **operational ontology** for data management and integration.

# Competency Questions:

SIL/SENS
TODO: Engage with Area data managers to see what input they have (PSDCoP)
Notes: Need differentiators between methods
Product: Translation layer, SIL fields -> Working databases people use to generate their estimates.
 
1) Was an expansion factor and if so which one in producing a Stream Inspection Log?
2) Are the stream inspections conducted in the same place each year?
3) If not in the sample place, why not?
4) Are the observations performed on spawning beds or on channels before the spawning beds?
5) What was the stream inspection method at a given site in a given year
6) What factors affected the quality of those observations (downgrade categories)
7) 

## Modelling Competency Questions

## Genetic Results

## FSARs

## SPSR

# Competency Questions — DFO Salmon Ontology MVP (v0.1)

**Scope:** Questions the MVP must answer across SPSR (hero), GRD, and SILS→Narratives, plus near‑term (v0.3) questions. Each item lists required fields/terms and whether it’s answerable **Now** (v0.1) or **Next** (v0.3).

---

## A) Terminology, Validation, and Provenance
- Where are **spawner_origin** values used inconsistently (e.g., *wild* vs *unmarked*)?  
  *Needs:* `spawner_origin` (SKOS), template validation (SHACL). **Now**
- Which records use a **proxy** (e.g., mainstem index, GSI) **without** a `proxy_justification`?  
  *Needs:* `data_source_type`, `proxy_justification`. **Now**
- For each record derived from **GSI**, is an **uncertainty metric** present (e.g., `gsi_sample_size`, `gsi_confidence_interval`)?  
  *Needs:* `data_source_type=genetic_proxy`, `gsi_sample_size`, `gsi_confidence_interval`. **Now**
- Which assessments/narratives lack **minimum provenance** (data sources, method, code version, reviewer, date)?  
  *Needs:* provenance profile (PROV/DQV), `method`, `code_version`, `reviewer`. **Now**
- Which SPSR submissions fail **required‑field validation** and what are the **fix hints**?  
  *Needs:* SHACL shapes + validator outputs. **Now**

## B) CU↔SMU Crosswalk and Governance
- For a given **SMU**, which **CUs** participate and with what **rationale/version**?  
  *Needs:* CU↔SMU crosswalk (SKOS + CSV), `rationale`, `version_date`. **Now**
- Where does a **CU** appear in **multiple SMUs**, and what governance note explains it?  
  *Needs:* crosswalk notes, ambiguity flags. **Now**
- Show **status disagreements** or **data‑deficient** flags across CUs within an SMU.  
  *Needs:* CU status, DD flags, mapping to SMU. **Next**

## C) Reference Points / Benchmarks
- For each CU/SMU, which **reference_point_type** and **benchmark_method** were used?  
  *Needs:* `reference_point_type` (Sgen, Sref, FRP‑L, USR, LRP…), `benchmark_method` (SR, percentile, expert). **Now**
- Where is **benchmark_sensitivity** flagged (e.g., dependence on priors/assumptions)?  
  *Needs:* `benchmark_sensitivity` boolean/enum + note. **Now**
- Given an SMU, list component CU **LBMs** used to derive the **LRP**, with links to methods.  
  *Needs:* CU LBM values + SMU LRP derivation provenance. **Next**

## D) GRD ↔ SPSR Interoperability (GSI)
- For a given **Run_ID**/**Sample_ID**, what **assay/panel** produced the result and where is it applied in SPSR?  
  *Needs:* GRD keys (`Run_ID`, `Sample_ID`, `Assay_ID`), join table or mapping. **Now** (structure), **Next** (full linkage)
- List SPSR estimates that **consume GSI composition** without propagating **uncertainty**.  
  *Needs:* link from SPSR record → GRD result (or proxy flag) + uncertainty fields. **Next**

## E) SILS → Narrative Reproducibility
- Which **stream inspections** (SILS) were combined to form a **narrative**, and what rules were applied?  
  *Needs:* narrative bundle metadata (`inputs`, `ruleset_id`, `method`), provenance. **Next**
- Are **sample sizes** and **variation estimates** recorded for narratives?  
  *Needs:* `sample_size`, `variance/CI`, calculation method. **Next**

## F) Decision‑Context Readiness (Management & Advice)
- For a selected **decision context** (e.g., TAC/HCR), are all **required indicators** and **reference points** present and current for the target SMU(s)?  
  *Needs:* decision→indicator mapping, ref point registry. **Next**
- Where are **gaps** (missing data/uncertainty) that would block advice generation?  
  *Needs:* completeness checks over required sets. **Next**

---

## Minimal SPARQL Sketches (for inclusion in the repo)
> Keep these as templates; wire to your triplestore built from vocab + metadata extracts.

- **Proxy w/out justification**  
  ```sparql
  SELECT ?record WHERE {
    ?record :data_source_type :genetic_proxy .
    FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?record :proxy_justification ?j . FILTER(STRLEN(STR(?j)) > 0) }
  }
  ```

- **Benchmark method by unit**  
  ```sparql
  SELECT ?unit ?refPoint ?method WHERE {
    ?unit :hasReferencePoint ?refPoint .
    ?refPoint :benchmark_method ?method .
  }
  ```

- **Missing provenance minimum**  
  ```sparql
  SELECT ?artifact WHERE {
    ?artifact a :AssessmentOrNarrative .
    FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?artifact :data_source ?s }
    UNION FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?artifact :method ?m }
    UNION FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?artifact :code_version ?v }
    UNION FILTER NOT EXISTS { ?artifact :reviewer ?r }
  }
  ```

---

## Field/Term Checklist for v0.1 (must exist in templates & SHACL)
- `spawner_origin` (SKOS) — values + definitions + examples
- `data_source_type` (direct_observation | model_estimate | genetic_proxy)
- `proxy_justification` (string)
- `reference_point_type` (SKOS) + `benchmark_method` + `benchmark_sensitivity`
- `gsi_sample_size`, `gsi_confidence_interval`, `gsi_data_source`
- CU↔SMU crosswalk table with `rationale`, `version_date`
- Provenance minimum: `data_source`, `method`, `code_version`, `reviewer`, `date`

---

## Prioritization Notes
- **Now (v0.1)** answers: terminology consistency, proxy justification, GSI uncertainty presence/absence, benchmark/method registry, CU↔SMU mapping with rationale, provenance minimum, validator pass/fail.
- **Next (v0.3)** adds: narrative bundles, LRP derivation trace, decision‑context completeness checks, uncertainty propagation from GRD.
